Pr 2 of 2: Add Microarray Pathway Analysis - GSEA example (#347)
AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples: 02-microarray/pathway-analysis_microarray_03_gsea.Rmd

filtered_dge_mapped_df <- dge_mapped_df %>%
  # Sort so that highest t-statistic values are at the top
  dplyr::arrange(dplyr::desc(t)) %>%
  # Filter out the duplicated rows using `dplyr::distinct()`-- this will keep
  # the first row with the duplicated value thus keeping the row with the
  # highest t-statistic value
  dplyr::distinct(entrez_id, .keep_all = TRUE)
```

Let's check to see that we removed the duplicate Entrez IDs and kept the row with the higher t-statistic value.

```{r}
filtered_dge_mapped_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(entrez_id == "336702")
```

Looks like we were able to successfully get rid of the duplicate gene identifiers and keep the observation with the higher t-statistic value!
Note however, that a caveat in using this approach is that the genes that have duplicate identifiers could be enriched in a particular pathway/gene set and we may get an overly optimistic view of how perturbed that pathway truly is.

**START REVIEW HERE**

## Perform gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)

The goal of GSEA is to determine whether the members of a set of genes are randomly distributed throughout the pre-ranked gene list or primarily found at the top or bottom of the list.

> Genes are ranked based on phenotype so we expect that sets related to a distinct phenotype will tend to show the latter distribution [@clusterProfiler-book].

Author: I tried rephrasing this in the most recent changes, please let me know if it is still unclear.

### Determine our pre-ranked genes list

The `GSEA()` function takes a pre-ranked (sorted) named vector of statistics, where the names in the vector are gene identifiers.

> This is step 1 -- gene-level statistics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is step 1 -- create a gene list with statistics that GSEA will rank by.
```

```{r}
# Let's create a named vector ranked based on the t-statistic values -- we

> # already sorted in the t-stastic values in descending order in the previous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# already sorted in the t-statistic values in descending order in the previous
```

# chunk so we won't need to do that here
t_vector <- filtered_dge_mapped_df$t
names(t_vector) <- filtered_dge_mapped_df$entrez_id
```

Let's preview our pre-ranked named vector.

```{r}
# Look at first entries of the ranked t-statistic vector
head(t_vector)
```

### Run GSEA using the `GSEA()` function

> 

Author: Per @jaclyn-taroni's [comment on PR #345](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/pull/345#discussion_r518109401), we will likely want to  move the explanation below up before the `gene ID conversion` section and reiterate here since we now need to explain some scientific decision making in the `gene ID conversion` section.

Reviewer 2: I think we do want to move this up, possibly before we install the libraries or under `Purpose of this analysis`. I would probably collect some of the information from throughout what is being added here (this section, around line 280, around line 395) and write up something pretty comprehensive as an introduction to the method to start. Then I'd _consider_ paring back what is written alongside the code chunks to reiterate the most salient points.

> The enrichment score (ES) for a pathway, a pathway-level statistic, is calculated using our gene-level statistics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The enrichment score (ES) is a pathway-level statistic, calculated using our gene-level statistics.
```

Genes are ranked from most highly positive to most highly negative and weighted according to their gene-level statistic.

> A running score is calculated by starting with the most highly ranked genes and increasing the score when a gene is in the pathway and decreasing the score when a gene is not in the pathway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An ES is calculated by starting with the most highly ranked genes and increasing the score when a gene is in the pathway and decreasing the score when a gene is not in the pathway.
```
What does it mean to `start with the most highly ranked genes`?

Reviewer: I'm wondering if some of this information about _how_ the scores are calculated would be better absorbed if it were given along side the enrichment plots. 

(But the overview of GSEA bits should still be kept here I think).

Author: > What does it mean to start with the most highly ranked genes?

The most highly ranked genes here refer to the highest positive and highest negative ranked genes according the t-statistic (tried to clarify this in the latest updates, please let me know if it is still not clear).

> I'm wondering if some of this information about how the scores are calculated would be better absorbed if it were given along side the enrichment plots.

> (But the overview of GSEA bits should still be kept here I think).

I also tried to rearrange this section as you suggested here in the latest updates to this PR.

> The ES is the maximum deviation from zero.

Reviewer: Are you saying that ESs can be negative or positive where 0 indicates randomness? 

I think you could move this sentence up above the 355 line. Tell us intuitively what the score means and then if needed, we can get into how that's calculated.

> Significance is assessed by generating a null distribution by sampling random gene sets of the same size and an FDR (false discovery rate) value is calculated to account for multiple hypothesis testing.

Reviewer: This tidbit might be better absorbed when we look at the pvalues at 386 - 387? What do you think?

Author: Agreed 👍

  TERM2GENE = dplyr::select(
    dr_hallmark_df,
    gs_name,
    entrez_gene
  )
)
```

Let's take a look at the results.

```{r}
# We can access the results from our gseaResult object using `@result`
head(gsea_results@result)
```

Looks like we have gene sets returned as significant at FDR of `0.05`.
If we didn't have any, our visualizations below would show up blank as nothing would have met our `pvalueCutoff` above.

The information we're most likely interested in is in the `results` slot.
Let's convert this into a data frame that we can use for further analysis and write to file.

```{r}
gsea_result_df <- data.frame(gsea_results@result)
```

## Visualizing results

We can visualize GSEA results for individual pathways or gene sets using `enrichplot::gseaplot()`.
Let's take a look at 2 different pathways -- one with a highly positive NES and one with a highly negative NES -- to get more insight into how ES are calculated.

### Highly Positive NES

Let's look for the gene set with the highest positive NES.

```{r}
gsea_result_df %>%
  # Combining the `dplyr::desc()` function with `dplyr::arrange()` sorts the
  # values in descending order

>   dplyr::arrange(dplyr::desc(NES))

Reviewer: Might be a good place to use `top_n()`? We don't really need everything printed out per se. Up to you.

```

The gene set `HALLMARK_TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKB` has the highest NES score.

```{r}
enrichplot::gseaplot(gsea_results,
  geneSetID = "HALLMARK_TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKB",
  title = "HALLMARK_TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKB",
  color.line = "#0d76ff"
)
```

> Notice how the genes that are in the gene set, indicated by the black bars, tend to be on the left side of the graph indicating that they have positive gene-level scores.

Reviewer: I like this sentence, can we add a sentence like it for describing the bottom panel? Aka what's the red dashed line about (looks like its the peak or max deviation from 0) we should probably highlight that and what it means.

The plots returned by `enrichplot::gseaplot` are ggplots, so we can use `ggplot2::ggsave()` to save them to file.

Let's save to PNG.

```{r}
ggplot2::ggsave(file.path(plots_dir, "GSE71270_gsea_enrich_positive_plot.png"),

>   plot = ggplot2::last_plot()

Reviewer: In case people run things out of order (which I think the type of user who are following these examples may be prone to do that) perhaps we should assign the plots and supply them directly to the `plot` instead of using `last_plot()`?

library(magrittr)
```

## Import data 

We will read in the differential expression results we will download from online.
These results are from a zebrafish microarray experiment we used for [differential expression analysis for two groups](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/02-microarray/differential-expression_microarray_02_2-groups.html) using [`limma`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html) [@Ritchie2015].

> The table contains summary statistics including Ensembl gene IDs, t-statistic values for each group, and adjusted p-values (FDR in this case).

Author: You're correct, this snuck back in from what was copied from training modules (got rid of it in the last commit).

head(dge_mapped_df)
```

> We do not want duplicated gene identifiers for the GSEA steps later as the `GSEA()` function will throw a warning that having duplicate gene names may produce unexpected results.

Author: I attempted to address this comment in the last commit via some restructuring and rewording. Please let me know if what I pushed in the latest commits are suffice (I was not sure if I should go more in depth about the warning message since users will not actually see it here).

## Perform gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)

> The goal of GSEA is to determine whether the members of a set of genes are randomly distributed throughout a pre-ranked gene list or primarily found at the top or bottom of the list meaning that they are highly- or lowly-ranked.

Reviewer 2: Is this the goal of the analysis or is it a description of the approach we use in service of our goal?

Author: Good question, this goal was inspired by the goal in the related GSEA article: https://www.pnas.org/content/102/43/15545 which states that
"The goal of GSEA is to determine whether members of a gene set S tend to occur toward the top (or bottom) of the list L, in which case the gene set is correlated with the phenotypic class distinction."

However, now that you point it out, I would classify this as a description of the approach we use in service of our goal. Will update appropriately 👍

> As mentioned earlier, hallmark gene sets summarize and represent specific well-defined biological states or processes and display coherent expression of genes so we would expect the latter distribution. [@clusterProfiler-book].

Reviewer 2: I don't think we _expect_ the latter distribution. It depends on the experiment! We might not always expect a particular pathway to be perturbed between our two groups. The way we run GSEA here (and almost every other way folks use GSEA) is a comparison between groups.

Author: Ahh okay that makes sense, will update this section to more accurately reflect what's going on here.

> We therefore expect that sets will tend to be highly- or lowly-ranked or, put another way, found at the top or bottom of the pre-ranked gene list [@clusterProfiler-book].

Reviewer: This sentence and 339 seem too similarly worded to be helpful. I think repetition or reiteration of an important point is good, but it feels a little too echoey. Can you explain it a different way or probably just delete it

### Determine our pre-ranked genes list

The `GSEA()` function takes a pre-ranked and sorted named vector of statistics, where the names in the vector are gene identifiers.
This is step 1 -- create a gene list with statistics that GSEA will rank by.

```{r}
# Let's create a named vector ranked based on the t-statistic values -- we
# need to sort the t-statistic values in descending order here
t_vector <- filtered_dge_mapped_df$t
names(t_vector) <- filtered_dge_mapped_df$entrez_id

> t_vector <- sort(t_vector, decreasing = TRUE)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# We need to sort the t-statistic values in descending order here
t_vector <- sort(t_vector, decreasing = TRUE)
```
And then delete the second half of the comment above. I think placing the comment with its corresponding code makes it easier for the user to parse out which step is which.

Genes are ranked from most highly positive to most highly negative and weighted according to their gene-level statistic.
The enrichment score (ES) is a pathway-level statistic, calculated using our gene-level statistics.
Normalized enrichment scores (NES) are enrichment scores that are scaled to make gene sets that contain different number of genes comparable [@Subramanian2005; @Korotkevich2019].

We can use the `GSEA()` function to perform GSEA with any generic set of gene sets, but there are several functions for using specific, commonly used gene sets (e.g., `gseKEGG()`).

```{r}
gsea_results <- GSEA(
  geneList = t_vector, # ordered ranked gene list
  minGSSize = 25, # minimum gene set size
  maxGSSize = 500, # maximum gene set set
  pvalueCutoff = 0.05, # p value cutoff
  eps = 0, # boundary for calculating the p value
  seed = TRUE, # set seed to make results reproducible
  pAdjustMethod = "BH", # Benjamini-Hochberg correction
  TERM2GENE = dplyr::select(
    dr_hallmark_df,
    gs_name,
    entrez_gene
  )
)
```

Let's take a look at the results.

```{r}
# We can access the results from our gseaResult object using `@result`
head(gsea_results@result)
```

> Significance is assessed by generating a null distribution by sampling random gene sets of the same size and an FDR (false discovery rate) value is calculated to account for multiple hypothesis testing.

Reviewer 2: I _believe_ that this implementation permutes the gene labels and uses the same gene set? It's basically accomplishing the same thing – you get an distribution of ES values for a gene sets that are the same size as the _real_ gene set but the relationship between the gene set and the true ranking is "broken."  I would describe it the same way that the docs or book for clusterProfiler do. (I think this may come directly from training material and I made it a point to talk about there would be two different ways to accomplish the goal / I just wanted the point to land using whatever mental model worked best for someone.) I may be overthinking it. I can't tell.

Author: Gotcha! I'll revisit the docs and be sure to describe this section in a way which is more closely aligned with what's in the docs relevant to the package version we are using.

In this case, the most highly positive enrichment score's data are being displayed.

The plots returned by `enrichplot::gseaplot` are ggplots, so we can use `ggplot2::ggsave()` to save them to file.

Let's save to PNG.

```{r}
ggplot2::ggsave(file.path(plots_dir, "GSE71270_gsea_enrich_positive_plot.png"),
  plot = most_positive_nes_plot
)
```

### Most Negative NES

Let's look for the gene set with the most negative NES.

```{r}
gsea_result_df %>%
  # Use `top_n()` to return the top n observation using `NES` as the ordering
  # variable -- note the use of `-n` to display the top n values when sorted
  # in descending order
  dplyr::top_n(n = -3, wt = NES)
```

The gene set `HALLMARK_E2F_TARGETS` has the most negative NES.

```{r}
most_negative_nes_plot <- enrichplot::gseaplot(
  gsea_results,
  geneSetID = "HALLMARK_E2F_TARGETS",
  title = "HALLMARK_E2F_TARGETS",
  color.line = "#0d76ff"
)

most_negative_nes_plot
```

This gene set shows the opposite pattern -- genes in the pathway tend to be on the right side of the graph.
Again, the red dashed line here indicates the maximum deviation from zero, in other words, the most negative ES score.

> An ES is calculated by starting with the most highly ranked genes (according to the gene-level t-statistic values) and increasing the score when a gene is in the pathway and decreasing the score when a gene is not in the pathway.

Reviewer: The sentence here looks like its still describing positive ES. Feel free to change around this wording suggestion, but we need it to describe NES. 
```suggestion
Here the ES is calculated by starting with the most lowly ranked genes (according to the gene-level t-statistic values) and making the score more negative when a gene is in the pathway. 
```

## Perform gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)

The goal of GSEA is to detect situations where all genes in a gene set change in a coordinated way, detecting even small statistical but coordinated changes.
This is done by ranking genes within a gene set from most highly positive to most highly negative, weighting them according to their gene-level statistic, to calculate the enrichment score (ES), which is a pathway-level statistic [@clusterProfiler-book].

### Determine our pre-ranked genes list

The `GSEA()` function takes a pre-ranked and sorted named vector of statistics, where the names in the vector are gene identifiers.

> This is step 1 -- create a gene list with statistics that GSEA will rank by.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this may be leftover from training material where we say more about steps? Or maybe the training material doesn't say anything about steps after 1 #itwasapilot.

```{r}
gsea_result_df <- data.frame(gsea_results@result)
```

## Visualizing results

We can visualize GSEA results for individual pathways or gene sets using `enrichplot::gseaplot()`.
Let's take a look at 2 different pathways -- one with a highly positive NES and one with a highly negative NES -- to get more insight into how ES are calculated.

### Most Positive NES

Let's look for the gene set with the most positive NES.

```{r}
gsea_result_df %>%
  # Use `top_n()` to return the top n observation using `NES` as the ordering variable
  dplyr::top_n(n = 3, wt = NES)
```

The gene set `HALLMARK_TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKB` has the most positive NES score.

```{r}
most_positive_nes_plot <- enrichplot::gseaplot(
  gsea_results,
  geneSetID = "HALLMARK_TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKB",
  title = "HALLMARK_TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKB",
  color.line = "#0d76ff"
)

most_positive_nes_plot
```

Notice how the genes that are in the gene set, indicated by the black bars, tend to be on the left side of the graph indicating that they have positive gene-level scores.
The red dashed line indicates the peak ES score (the ES is the maximum deviation from zero).

> An ES is calculated by starting with the most highly ranked genes (according to the gene-level t-statistic values) and increasing the score when a gene is in the pathway and decreasing the score when a gene is not in the pathway.

Reviewer 2: I _believe_ this is the first time we talk about this which seems _odd_. There may be something that isn't in the diff/was added earlier that I'm missing.

Author: I believe when I addressed one of the earlier review comments, I removed it from an earlier section but have now included it in the brief intro under the `Purpose of this analysis` section.

In this case, the most highly positive enrichment score's data are being displayed.

The plots returned by `enrichplot::gseaplot` are ggplots, so we can use `ggplot2::ggsave()` to save them to file.

Let's save to PNG.

```{r}
ggplot2::ggsave(file.path(plots_dir, "GSE71270_gsea_enrich_positive_plot.png"),
  plot = most_positive_nes_plot
)
```

### Most Negative NES

Let's look for the gene set with the most negative NES.

```{r}
gsea_result_df %>%
  # Use `top_n()` to return the top n observation using `NES` as the ordering
  # variable -- note the use of `-n` to display the top n values when sorted
  # in descending order
  dplyr::top_n(n = -3, wt = NES)
```

The gene set `HALLMARK_E2F_TARGETS` has the most negative NES.

```{r}
most_negative_nes_plot <- enrichplot::gseaplot(
  gsea_results,
  geneSetID = "HALLMARK_E2F_TARGETS",
  title = "HALLMARK_E2F_TARGETS",
  color.line = "#0d76ff"
)

most_negative_nes_plot
```

This gene set shows the opposite pattern -- genes in the pathway tend to be on the right side of the graph.
Again, the red dashed line here indicates the maximum deviation from zero, in other words, the most negative ES score.

> Here the ES is calculated by starting with the most lowly ranked genes (according to the gene-level t-statistic values) and making the score more negative when a gene is in the pathway.

Reviewer 2: Do you have documentation to support this? I would imagine we wouldn't be able to tell which "end" to start with and by virtue of not having many of the genes at the beginning of the list you'd decrement the score a lot and therefore end up with a negative enrichment score.

Author: Good question, this language was suggested in an earlier review comment but without the documentation to support it. I fixed the language in accordance with your comment above.

```{r}
gsea_result_df %>%
  # Use `top_n()` to return the top n observation using `NES` as the ordering variable

>   dplyr::top_n(n = 1, wt = NES)

Reviewer: Can print out more than 1 just to show a little bit of a preview? Not 100% necessary but might be nice.

```

The gene set `HALLMARK_TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKB` has the highest positive NES score.

```{r}
highly_positive_nes_plot <- enrichplot::gseaplot(
  gsea_results,
  geneSetID = "HALLMARK_TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKB",
  title = "HALLMARK_TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKB",
  color.line = "#0d76ff"
)

highly_positive_nes_plot
```

Notice how the genes that are in the gene set, indicated by the black bars, tend to be on the left side of the graph indicating that they have positive gene-level scores.
The red dashed line indicates the peak ES score (the ES is the maximum deviation from zero).
An ES is calculated by starting with the most highly ranked genes (according to the gene-level t-statistic values) and increasing the score when a gene is in the pathway and decreasing the score when a gene is not in the pathway.

> In this case, the most highly positive enrichment scores are being displayed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the most highly positive enrichment score's data are being displayed.
```
The graph is only associated with one NES right?

```{r}
gsea_result_df %>%
  # Use `top_n()` to return the top n observation using `NES` as the ordering
  # variable -- note the use of `dplyr::desc()` to sort the values in descending order

>   dplyr::top_n(n = 1, wt = dplyr::desc(NES))

Reviewer: You can use -1 for this purpose instead of `desc()` That's what the docs show: https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/reference/top_n.html

```

> The gene set `HALLMARK_E2F_TARGETS` has the highest negative NES.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The gene set `HALLMARK_E2F_TARGETS` has the most negative NES.
```

It didn't occur to me before but "highest negative" sounds weird. Should we change this or is it not as weird as I'm thinking it is?

Author: Agreed, for consistency, I mimicked this language when speaking about the _most_ positive NES as well. Please let me know if you think I should change that back to _highest positive_.

```{r}
highly_negative_nes_plot <- enrichplot::gseaplot(
  gsea_results,
  geneSetID = "HALLMARK_E2F_TARGETS",
  title = "HALLMARK_E2F_TARGETS",
  color.line = "#0d76ff"
)

highly_negative_nes_plot
```

This gene set shows the opposite pattern -- genes in the pathway tend to be on the right side of the graph.

> Again, the red dashed line here indicates the peak ES score (the ES is the maximum deviation from zero).

Reviewer: This would probably be
```suggestion
Again, the red dashed line here indicates the maximum deviation from zero, in other words, the most negative ES score.
```
